
## 0 # Welcome to the Scalanator Akka Course

*Note that this course is under development and the text and exercises may be incomplete*

Welcome to the Scalanator.io Akka course.

Concurrency, parallelism, fault tolerance and distribution are hard -
especially if you try and do them all at the same time.

Actors are a way to model the complexities of building large scale asynchronous systems.

This course will give you experience with building everything you need to know to create effective scalable systems in Akka.

## 100 # Building a mental model - Introduction

Before we start writing Actors we will cover some key concepts about the Actor model.    We are going to use an analogy to explain them.

Welcome to Widget Inc.

(Picture of office block)

Before the days of the internet items could be purchased via mail order.  Customers would send a letter and receive their response or items the same way.

The letter might be
* "Please give me the dimensions of your Widget"
* "Please tell me the price of 3 widgets and 2 gadgets"
* "Please send me 1 widget"

## 110 # Building a mental model - The simplest approach

Widget Inc is a one man company.  So our worker:

1. Waits for a letter
2. Reads the letter
3. Actions the letter
4. Replies
4. Repeats

As long as the worker can keep up with the number of letters  being received there is no problem..
  However some tasks take a long time, for instance , to accept a cheque the worker must go to the bank to cash it before he sends out the goods.  Whilst doing so he cannot answer even the simplest query.

## 120 # Building a mental model - The simplest approach - Speeding up

Our business has grown, our one worker cannot keep up. How do we fix this?  We add more workers!

Each of our new workers follow the original plan as above, but each picks up mail from a shared pile.  In theory doubling the number of workers, doubles the throughput - easy.

If the company receives two orders for a widget, what the two workers might each try to:
1. Check there is a widget in the warehouse
2. Go to the bank and cash the cheque
3. Collect the widget and send it to the customer.

For sake of argument let us imagine that two orders came in at the same time and there is a single widget in the warehouse.  Two workers start processing the orders, they both check the warehouse and go to the bank to cash the check.

The first worker to return picks up the widget and sends it to the customer, the second worker gets to the warehouse and is stuck, he has taken payment, but there is no widget to send.

## 130 # Building a mental model - The simplest approach - Complexity attacks

Many of the tasks require some interaction with other workers.  As the number increases so does the complexity.  Each one can be solved.  For the first example you could have a warehouse key so the logic becomes:

1. Acquire key to warehouse
2. Check stock level
3. Process payment
4. Pick the item and send it to the customer
5. Return key

But now we are back to only being able to handle one sales order at a time, no matter how many workers we have.

Each situation is solvable, but the complexity gets rapidly increases the more steps and interactions we have.  It becomes very hard to write a set of instructions for a worker that will ensure we do not lead to bad situations and are foolproof.


## 140 # Building a mental model - Fighting the complexity

Given any single problem, each is solvable (we could take the key, go into the storeroom, check the item, reserve it, return the key and then go to the bank).  The problem is that the complexity increases exponentially.  Our workers follow the given instructions perfectly but it is getting impossible to write instructions that are clear and ensure they are correct under all circumstances.

How can we as writers of instructions ensure they are correct?
The answer comes from finding a simplification that we can apply.  Any simplification is a tradeoff between strengths and weaknesses.

We are going to use a solution from the industrial revolution, specialisation.

## 150 # Building a mental model - Fight the complexity - Rebuilding our fActory

In the real world we face two problems, the ability to write correct instructions and the ability for our workers to accurately follow those instructions.  In our imaginary world we only have to deal with the first problem.  Our workers are pedantic, they will follow the instructions exactly as given and give up if they do not know what to do, but they will make no errors of their own.

So how to do we as instruction authors create sets of instructions that we can effectively manage and share.  The answer is isolation and specialisation.   We are going to break things up and add some rules to make thinking about the problems easier.

## 160 # Building a mental model - Fight the complexity - Rebuilding our fActory 2

Our first step is to hire more workers, but make each workers job more focused.  Rather than a general dogsbody who is responsible for all aspects of an order we are going to hire people in the mailroom, people in the billing department and people in the warehouse.


## 200 # Building a mental model - The new design

Our new fActory is going to go even further, we are going to isolate each worker into their own room and only let them communicate via our shiny new message system.

In the next section we are going to formalise various bits of our new fActory design.  Some of the choices or rules may feel arbitrary but we will touch the underlying reasons later.

## 210 # Building a mental model - The new design - Messages

The first rule we are going to instigate is that each worker can only communicate with other workers via a shiny new pneumatic message tube system.

Message tube systems exist in the real world, for example [UMHS Pneumatic message system](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gAlzYLcqsTU)

This means messages gain key properties:
1. A message goes to a single recipient
2. A message cannot be changed once it has been sent
3. The order of messages from a given sender to a given receiver is always maintained

## 220 # Building a mental model - The new design - Workers and Offices

Each of our workers is going to get their own office.  Each office has an incoming message tube, an outgoing message tube, a pad of paper for keeping notes and an instruction manual.

Each worker sits in their office waiting for messages, on receipt of a message they read the message, lookup in the instruction manual for what action to take.
For example they could:

1. Do nothing - simply discard the message
2. Update some information on their pad of paper
3. Send new messages to others
4. Forward the message to somebody else
5. A mixture of the above

Each worker processes a single message at a time and will ignore any other messages until that message is handled.

## 230 # Building a mental model - The new design - Is it better?

This new layout seems like a lot of work and setup for no obvious immediate gain.  The key benefit (and the key benefit of all design patterns) is the ability to reason about a part of the design in isolation.

Now when thinking about the warehouse we only need to worry about 'can I reserve X', please dispatch 'Y' without ever having to consider billing or any other aspect of the business.  The only things you need to be aware of are:
* The current state (what stock we have)
* The current message we are processing



## 270 # Building a mental model - Managing workers

Workers in our fActory are highly strung.  If at any time they arrive at a situation they do not know how to handle they trash their office and walk out.  Even in our brave new world it is possible that we have missed something causing a failure, so how do we handle this?

We handle this issue through supervision.  A worker is hired and is managed by a single supervisor.  If the worker quits, the supervisor is informed.  The supervisor may do one of several things:

1. Accept it and continue
2. Hire a replacement worker
3. Quit themselves

One extra rule is that everyone must have a supervisor, if a supervisor quits for any reason their workers will be summarily fired.

This means that everybody is supervised, all the way to the top.  At the top we have a special company 'guardian'.   If the most senior manager quits the guardian shuts down the company.


## 250 # Building a mental model - Expensive workers

Let us imagine for a moment that workers are expensive. How can we keep our new system, but reduce our overheads?

It turns out that a lot of the time a lot of our workers are actually idle, sitting in a room waiting for a new message.   Lets fire them all and leave ourselves with a single worker - but we are going to change his job a little.  Instead of sitting in a single room the worker will rove the building, looking for offices with messages waiting.  If he sees one, he pops in, uses the instructions to handle the message and then goes back to roaming the building.

When you think about this all of the work will still get done.  No two pieces of work are done at the same time (it might be slower), but the outcome is exactly the same.

This is 'concurrency' we are 'dealing with a lot of things at once', without getting confused or losing track.


## 260 # Building a mental model - Expensive workers 2

So now we realised we could do all of the work with a single worker, but keeping our ability to think about the organisation clear, we can ramp up the speed.  We simply hire more workers to roam the building.  This is 'parallelism', we are *simultaneously* 'doing a lot of things at once.

It is worth keeping these two goals in mind, dividing work into chunks that can be done simultaneously and increasing throughput by doing them at the same time.

In most cases it is easier to think about a single worker working in a single room.

## 240 # Building a mental model - Why this model works

This model achieves two things, firstly it is much easier to reason (better for us) about and secondly we can have workers working in parallel.

For tasks that are independent the workers can perform their jobs simultaneously.  For example a billing a customer vs sending an order.

Work that needs to be coordinated (such as two order reservations in the warehouse) and processed in a consistent way by a single worker.

## 500 # Moving to the real world

## 505 # Our program

The program we are creating is our fActory.  To create the fActory we define

## 510 # Actors - Introduction

In Akka parlance each worker in an Actor.  Actors are simply classes that extend the class ```Actor```.  The only requirement is that you implement the ```receive``` function.  Each message sent to your Actor’s mailbox is handed to this function in turn.    You can think of this as a single thread performing this action:

```
while(true) {
	val message = mailBox.take() // block if none ready
	Actor.receive(message)
}
```

This means that within the ```receive``` function you do not need to worry about multi-threading at all.  However, if you block within your Actor's ```receive``` block you will not have any more messages delivered.

## 515 # Actors - Our first Actor

Let us implement our first Actor.  When this Actor receives a  ```SayHello``` message it will log the String “Hello name” - where name comes from the message.
If it receives any other message it will simply log that it did not recognise the message.

```{.scala .numberLines }
import akka.Actor.{Actor, ActorLogging}

case class SayHello(name: String)

class HelloActor extends Actor with ActorLogging {

  def receive = {
    case SayHello(name) => log.info(s"Hello $name")
    case _      => log.info("received unknown message")
  }
}
```


## 550 # Actors - Introducing ```ActorRef```s

An Actor is just a class, which means if we had a reference to a given Actor we could easily break encapsulation and thread safety by directly accessing the Actors methods and variables.

In Akka we never deal with an Actor directly, but only by its handle.  The ```ActorRef``` is an Actors 'address card'.  In our mental model you could think of this as the assigned office number, only if you are told where somebody is can you send them a message.

In Akka you never construct an ```ActorRef``` yourself.  There are three primary ways to obtain a reference:
1. When you ask Akka to construct an Actor (we will cover this later), you are returned the ```ActorRef```.
2. Within an Actor you can see ```self``` which is your own Actor reference and ```sender``` which is the address of the message sender of the current message.
3. An Actor can also see the ```ActorRef``` of its parent, and any children it has created.
3. You can received an ```ActorRef``` in a message.

## 560 # Actors - Sending messages

All inter-Actor communication is via message. To send an Actor a message by using the ```ActorRef``` using the ```!``` method.

```scala
  ref ! message
```

Remember, this is asynchronous, but one extra rule is applied:

```scala
  ref ! message1
  ref ! message2
```

```message1``` will be delivered to ```ref``` before ```message2```


## 570 # Actors - Your turn

For this exercise, update the Actor to send back the received message to
the sender:

@:editor file=exercises/first/FirstActor.scala

## 575 # Actors - Creating Actors with Props

One thing that might seem strange at first is that you do not type:

```scala
val myActor = new FirstActor()
```
Instead you create a Props object such as:
```scala
val myActorRef = system.ActorOf(Props(new FirstActor()))
```
outside an Actor or:
``` {.scala .numberLines }
val myActorRef = context.system.ActorOf(Props(new FirstActor())
```
inside an Actor.

A ```Props``` is a definition of an Actor - it is a immutable, shareable fActory for creating instances (we will do more with this feature later).
Whilst it feels long winded this pattern helps us do several things:
1. Hides the actual object reference (we only want the ActorRef).
2. Allows sharing of creation patterns (more on that later)
3.  Maintains the supervisor/child relationship

## 580 # Actors - Creating Actors with Props 2

There are three ways of creating a ```Props``` instance:

### No parameter type creation
```scala
val props = Props[FirstActor]
```

### Using a type constructor
```scala
val props = Props(classOf[ActorWithParams], "param1", "param2"...)
```
One problem with this constructor is that is is not typesafe, the parameters are only checked via reflection at runtime.

### Using a type constructor

```scala
val props = Props(classOf[ActorWithParams], "param1", "param2"...)
```

### Using a lazy constructor

XXXX REWORK THIS - lazy constructor

```scala
val props = Props(new ActorWithParams("param1", "param2"...))
```
This is our preferred way of constructing Actors, however it does have a dangerous side.

## 590 # Actors - Creating Actors with Props 3

If you call
```scala
val props = Props(new ActorWithParams("param1", "param2"...))
```
 within an Actor you can risk closing over the Actor’s internal state (i.e. granting access to an immutable internal variable which should not have been exposed).

A simply pattern prevents this:

```{.scala .numberLines }
import akka.Actor.{Actor, ActorLogging, Props}

case class SayHello(name: String)

class GreetActor private (greeting: String) extends Actor with ActorLogging {

  def receive = {
    case SayHello(name) => log.info("$greeting $name")
    case _      => log.info("received unknown message")
  }
}

object GreetActor {
  def props(greeting: String): Props =
    Props(new GreetActor(greeting))
}
```
Marking the constructor private and pushing the construction of the Props into a method on the companion object means that people cannot accidentally close over state, but maintain compile time type safety.


## 1000 # Sieve - The Sieve of Eratosthenes

To give you a sense of build systems out of Actors we are going to build a small application


## 1010 # Sieve - The 'Sieve of Eratosthenes'

A very simple way to find prime numbers is through sieving.
Imagine a sequence of integers we will add a sequence of sieves to the weed out numbers.  Each sieve will sieve out any number exactly divisible by the first number it sees.
We start our count with 2, so the first sieve will become a 2 sieve removing any number which is an exact multiple of 2 (4,6,8 etc)
The second sieve will see the number 3 and begin to sieve out exact multiples of three (those that is sees, 3,9,15, note it will never see 6 and 12 because those will have been removed by the first sieve)

Each sieve will begin seeing a prime number and then will prevent any multiples of that prime passing through.

We are going to build an application which implements an Actor based sieve to find the first N primes.  We will explore
 some akka features along the way.

## 1020 #  Sieve - The source

Our first task is to create a number source - it needs to provide the next integer in the sequence to the requestor.
A formal definition of the Actor is as follows:
* Take a given initial seed
* Each time a 'Next' message is received reply with the next number in the highest integer (starting with the seed)

Here is our Actor outline

``` {.scala .numberLines }
package sieve

import akka.Actor.{Actor, Props}
import sieve.NumberSource.Next

object NumberSource {
  def props(start: Int): Props = Props(new NumberSource(start))

  case object Next
}

class NumberSource private (seed: Int) extends Actor {

  private var next = ???
  override def receive = {
    case Next =>
        ???
  }
}
```

This follows the template from the previous example

## 1030 # Sieve - Black box testing

Let us do a little bit of TDD - one of the facets that make Actors so compelling is their inherent testability.
In most cases (except, for example, when it is wrapping underlying IO).  A well designed Actor has external interactions other than the messages it receives, sends and the child Actors it creates.

Akka comes with the Akka TestKit, a set of test utilities that make it easy to exercise an Actors behaviour.
Below is a simple test of the Number source (our testing would generally be a little more extensive than this ;) )

Take a look at the following code:

``` { .scala .numberLines }
val numberSource = system.ActorOf(NumberSource.props(10))
numberSource ! NumberSource.Next
expectMsg(10)
numberSource ! NumberSource.Next
expectMsg(11)
numberSource ! NumberSource.Next
expectMsg(12)
```

This code is executed within a test harness we will cover in the next lesson.  By default the test kit uses itself as the message sender (the ```sender``` you will reply to).

On line 1 we create an instance of the Number Source class.
One line 2 we send the number source the ```Next``` message (defined on the ```NumberSource``` companion object)
One line 3 we wait a message in reply (in this case 10).
We then send ```Next``` again expecting to receive the next number in the sequence.


## 1040 # Sieve - Implementing the NumberSource - your turn

You task is to now implement the ```NumberSource``` behaviour


@:editor file=exercises/createns/NumberSource.scala


## 1050 # Sieve - Creating the sieve

So let us define our Sieve Actor.  The sieve Actor:

* Takes a ```target``` to which to send primes and requests for more numbers.
* Publishes the first number it sees as a prime, using the message ```FoundPrime()``` and creates a new child sieve.
* From then on filters all remaining numbers
  * If it is exactly divisible by ```prime``` sends ```Next``` to the ```target``` to request a new number.
  * It is is not divisible forward to the next sieve (child).

## 1060 # Sieve - Immutability in Actors and becoming

The ```Sieve``` Actor has two distinct states, before and after it has seen its first number.
We can model this in two ways, firstly we could have mutable variables for the prime number and the child reference
(both of which need to handle subsequent numbers) or we can use the ```become``` method.

The simplest Actor says

``` {.scala .numberLines}
override def receive: Receive = {
    case x => // do something with x
}
```

become allows us to subtitute an alternate receive method (which can take parameters e.g. )
``` {.scala .numberLines}
def gotPrimeReceive(prime: Int): Receive = {
    case x : Int =>

}
```

To switch incoming messages to use the method we simply call:

``` {.scala .numberLines}
context.become(gotPrimeReceive(p, true)
```

The second parameter allow us to handle receives as a stack, pushing and popping receive handlers - in our case we
simply want to ```become``` a new state and discard to previous one.

## 1060 # Sieve - Testing Actors that create children

Testing the behaviour of Actors that create children is fiddly.  If the parent creates an child by simply:

```scala
context.ActorOf(Sieve.props(target))
```

XXXXXX

## 1070 # Sieve - Your Turn

@:editor file=exercises/createsieve/Sieve.scala


## 3000 # Random Stuff

## 3010 # Futures and closure over state

TODO Talk about closing over state and moving future work outside of the Actor into companion to avoid.


## 4000 # Rules for Actors

### 1. Only use immutable messages

Passing mutable state in messages is the road to madness.  By not obeying this cardinal rule you have thrown away all of the safety the Actor system has built.
We recommend you use case classes and immutable data structures for all messages.
The one exception we generally make for this is the passing of a ```Promise``` to allow results to be shared in multiple places.


### 2. Never Block your Actor

Putting a blocking call in your Actor means that it is unreachable, it will not receive any other messages until the blocking call has completed and cannot be interrupted.

Use futures, ```become``` and messages to avoid blocking (e.g. doing an ```ask```)

### 3. Never let state leak out of your Actor

To maintain the model’s integrity do not expose any internal state of your Actor outside of the Actor.  Avoid:
1. Creating ```Props``` of a child directly in your class, see the discussion in the ```Props``` section.
2. Be careful with ```future.onComplete``` and its friends - code in the completion block is executed in the futures thread space, not on the Actor thread, meaning you exposing Actor state outside the Actor.

## 9999 # Fin

You made it - thanks for coming!

We hope you have enjoyed this course - we would love to hear your feedback.





